
 Since 2007, the sub-prime crisis originating in the United States has forced countries such as the USA and the UK to nationalize parts of their financial sector. But why has China's nationalized part, the state-owned economy, impacted by the U. S. financial crisis as well, been denounced in the Chinese context? Although the crisis shows that free-market fundamentalism is problematic in almost all respects, why can this line of thinking dominate economics education and the media in China even more completely and thoroughly than before? How does the ongoing debate on guojinmintui affect the current poli- cies and the changes in ownership structure in the future? Does the prospect of socialism in China still exist? Let us consider these ques- tions further.
 
Chinese leaders initiated the reform towards marketization in 1978 with a claimed alim of rejuvenating the socialist system. The means taken mainly include developing private enterprises and attract- ing foreign investment by granting private and foreign enterprises exceptionally favorable conditions which are better than those given to SOEs. In order to gain support for the marketization, almost all social groups, including party cadres, army leaders, students, and merchants, participated in business in the early 1980s. In the process of dismantling the planned economy, especially in the price reforms, the establishment of markets for capital and land, and SOE reforms, some Party members and cadres in enterprises and governments started to accumulate capital through both legal and illegal means. The weakening of central planning made the national economy rely increasingly on the expansion of market and monetary incentives. At the same time, various contradictions emerging in the process of development had to be solved by deepening marketization. From this process has emerged a new capitalist class composed mainly of private proprietors and people who have close relations with political and economic powers as well as transnational capitals. As the size and wealth of this emerging capitalist class grew bigger and their power grew stronger, they would necessarily demand abandoning the social- ist elements within the current system, which might impede further accumulation of wealth (Kotz, 2009). Under the cover of "reform," education, health care, housing, and social security, which belonged to the public sphere and represented socialist characteristics in the past, have been marketized continuously.

The stated goal of the reform was the creation of a socialist market economy. However, in the 1990s, the key issue changed into transition to a "market economy" in general, and this became the focal point of theoretical discussions and policy designs. The aftermath of this transition - the resulting economic model and its nature - was absent from discussions, consciously or unconsciously. The socialist elements of the Chinese economy have been reduced only to SOEs and macroeconomic control (Song and Sun, 2010). As a matter of fact, the state-owned economy in China has been largely regarded as the basis on which the state can guide economic development, but has not functioned as a model for other parts of the economy to fol- low. Theoretical discussions and concrete policy both point toward an American-style market economy as the goal of Chinese reform (Song and Sun, 2010). As both economics education and the national economy have been geared to the American style, many economists  trained in neoliberal economics in the United States have been invited to China, and granted the power to reform economics education in top academic institutions. Their advocacy of neoliberal economics in China not only has marginalized Marxist economics, but has also brought up a generation of young scholars with a blind faith in neo- liberalism. With this neoliberal background, the inefficiency of SOEs has become a tenet of faith, which indirectly challenged the existence of socialist elements in the market economy. To make matters worse, the concept of socialism has been transformed into a series of abstract concepts such as "equality"and "fairness. "The underlying logic is to strengthen the capitalist traits of the marketization process by defam- ing socialism theoretically.

Economic structure is the basis of politics and ideology. When capitalist private ownership has dominated economic resources, the changes in the ownership structure and in the class structure will inevitably be reflected at the theoretical, ideological, and policy levels. Since 2004, the trend of denouncing public ownership and planned economy has become the core of theoretical and ideological debates. Chinese rightist elites have already been very experienced in trans- forming a topic into a public consensus via the media under their control. In this way, they can pressure the government to re-design policies, as already illustrated in a series of debates: the debate on SOE management buy-outs in 2004, the debate on the neoliberalization of Chinese economics education in 2005, the debate on the direction of Chinese reform in 2006, the debate on whether democratic socialism should be the target of reform in 2007, the debate on universal values and the "08 Charter" in 2008, etc. The essential point of all these debates is whether China should give up or persevere with socialism. Each began as a matter of concrete policy and expanded into debate over the core concepts of socialism, at which point Party and state leaders had to halt the discussion. In addition, Party and government attempts to garner sufficient support from both right and left have created discrepancies between socialist rhetoric and capitalist poli- cies. This type of expediency opens the doors to all ideological trends denouncing socialism and proposing privatization.

The current debate over guojinmintui reveals the continuation of privatization and the ongoing class struggle in China. The goal of the rightist officials, businessmen, scholars, and media elites, on behalf of capitalist interests, in initiating this debate is to theoretically  influence policy making, to fundamentally overthrow public own- ership, to potentially allow managers to embezzle public wealth by privatizing SOEs, to allow transnational capitals to control the Chinese economy, and eventually to abandon the state-owned economy — the last socialist element in China. The current debate substantially influences Chinese policies regarding the relationship between the state-owned and private economy. For example, on January 25, 2010, the State-Owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commis- sion of the State Council (SASAC) commanded 129 central SOEs to reorganize their hotel and restaurant business or even to exit from this area as soon as within three to five years. On March 18, 2010, the SASAC required 78 central SOEs that had been operating businesses, but not their major business, in the real estate sector to quit this area upon the completion of their current land development projects. Two hundred and twenty-seven enterprises were affected, and the assets involved totaled 99.1 billion yuan. A document, Proposals of the State Council on Encouraging and Leading Private Investment to Develop Healthily, was made public on May 13, 2010. These proposals entail that government enlarge the scope and scale of private investment, encourage and guide private investment in basic industries and infra- structure and financial sectors, and allow privately owned real estate corporations to build affordable houses, public rental units, and other policy-based housing.

It is obvious that, under current conditions, socialism with Chinese characteristics tends to develop into capitalism. In the course of the development of the market economy in China, as economic interests and the right to speak are becoming increasingly diverse, there will be further theoretical and policy-related debates over whether or not China should adhere to socialism. The rightist elites will inevitably create new topics to propose furthering privatization. However, as long as the CPC remains the ruling party, socialist legacies and rhetoric will not go extinct. Some socialist elements are still functioning, such as giant SOEs, the state-owned banking system, public ownership of land in the Constitution, and the implementation of national economic plans. In general, we are relatively optimistic concerning the further development of China's ownership structure. Without radical policy changes, the proportion of the economy under state ownership, in spite of some fluctuations, will remain relatively stable over time.

Firslt, top leaders of CPC have realized the necessity of keeping the dominant role of the state-owned economy in the socialist system with Chinese characteristics. For example, Vice President Jinping Xi pointed out that SOEs were strong forces for building a moderately prosperous society in all respects (Quanmian Jianshe Xiaokang She- hui), major pillars in building socialism with Chinese characteristics, an important basis on which the CPC can retain leadership, and an important area where the CPC's basic theories can be implemented and put into practice. The Fifth Plenary Session of the 17th CPC Cen- tral Committee in 2010 decided to set guaranteeing and improving people's livelihood and transforming the path of economic develop- ment as the focal target in the next five years. In addition, this session restated that the basic economic system of socialism would be kept on and improved. On the policy level, the driving forces for further reforms include improving people's livelihood, perfecting the current ownership structure, and solving various social conflicts emerging in the process of rapid marketization. Without the participation of the state-owned economy, these goals cannot be accomplished. In the Fourth Session of the 11th National People's Congress in 2011, Bang- guo Wu, chairperson of the NPC Standing Committee, stated firmly that China would not adopt a system of multiple parties holding office in rotation or adopt pluralization of the guiding dogma. He ruled out the possibility of separating powers among the executive, legislature and judiciary or adopting a bicameral or federal system, and also clearly declared that privatization was not under consideration. This statement showed again that the Chinese government would continue insisting on its socialist characteristics.

Second, it is difficult to privatize the current state-owned economy further. Financial statements show that SOEs perform very well in all aspects, so it is impractical and ungrounded to privatize SOEs. Then, most of the existing SOEs either have gone through the Initial Public Offering (IPO) or are huge in scale. Their major businesses involve capital- and/or technology-intensive industries. Eighty percent of the central SOEs' quality assets are concentrated in listed companies and are of high market value. The property-rights exchanges of the unlisted ones must be conducted on a designated special market through public auctioning. There is not enough private capital in China to buy out these SOEs. In the final analysis, ever since the debate over SOE management buy-outs in 2004, the whole society has been very cautious about the complex manipulations through which managers of SOEs turned public assets into private ones.

In addition, workers in the SOEs oppose privatization strongly. One iconic event is that in July 2009, workers in Tonghua Iron and Steel Group (TISG) launched an enterprise-level protest against private Jianlong Corporation buying out TISG. During this strike, a group of indignant workers beat the high-ranking managers des- ignated by Jianlong to death. This event forced the Jilin Provincial Government to stop its initial plan of privatizing TISG and triggered anti-privatization movements in other parts of the country, which to some extent impeded further privatization of SOEs (Chinese Worker Research Network, 2009).

Therefore, considering the competitiveness of SOEs in the market and workers'rising resistance, it is not so easy for SOE managers to appropriate state-owned assets through ownership reform as before. Meanwhile, growing nationalism makes buy-outs by transnational capital difficult.

Third, the "Chongqing Model"is supported by high-level CPC leaders. Since 2002, in the City of Chongqing, the eight state-owned investment corporations established through reorganization have managed to separate the operations of state-owned assets from govern- mental administrations. This means that the operations of state-owned assets are independent of governmental administrative commands and are not guaranteed by government's financial support. This line of policy results in a balance between long-term assets and liabili- ties, a balance between cash inflow and outflow, as well as a balance between input and output. From 2002 to the end of 2009, the value of state-owned productive assets within the City of Chongqing grew from 170 billion to 900 billion yuan. The increase in the value of state-owned assets in Chongqing allows the government to lower tax rates, increase investments in education, and reduce rents on lands. These developments demonstrate the benefits of a state-owned sector in a market economy.

Although state ownership does not necessarily mean socialist own- ership, we believe that state ownership is a form public ownership can take. At present, workers under state ownership not only enjoy a better position, as is shown in the TISG event, but also earn higher compen- sation. As shown in Table 2, though impacted by the economic crisis,  from 2008 to 2010, the per capita annual compensation for employees in non-private units (danwei) is still higher than their counterparts in private units. From this perspective, though the production relations in the state sector may not be fundamentally different from those in the private sector (e.g., both adopt some features of Fordism), state ownership appears to be more beneficial for workers at the level of income distribution. These benefits thus should be preserved in the course of reform.

In addition, historically speaking, to nationalize and turn a private economy into a state-owned economy appears to be one of the most efficient ways by which a public economy can be established. If the percentage of the Chinese economy under state ownership were to be lower than 15%, then it would be extremely difficult to restore social- ism in China, even for a leader who believed in socialism. Therefore, the defense of guojinmintui by Chinese leftist scholars indeed aims at guarding the socialist economic system in China.
 
It should also be noted that state ownership is not equivalent to public ownership: only under certain conditions can the former be turned into the latter. These conditions include at least the fol- lowing: 1) Regarding the relations of production, means of produc- tion should belong to the society and people hold equal positions in ownership. In the concrete labor process, there should be no antagonism between capital and labor. 2)Regarding the relation of distribution within enterprises, every laborer, including the enter- prise managers, should get paid only based on their work; within the whole society, the profits and gains from differential rents resulting from the monopolistic position SOEs occupy should be distributed to all people. 3) Regarding management and planning, the state, in charge of the national economy, should manage state-owned assets effectively according to the will of the society, and make them rep- resent people's shared interests, which should be prominent in bal- ancing among different types and sizes of enterprises and between central and regional plans. Within individual enterprises, laborers and other stakeholders can participate in the management of the enterprises effectively and democratically.

Under the current market regime, as SOEs are reformed and reor- ganized, the salaries of high-rank managers in SOEs are determined according to market value, whereas ordinary workers have to accept personnel and job assignments without appropriate compensation adjustments, which have contributed to broadened income gaps within SOEs. Meanwhile, the bureaucratic system within SOEs is so hierarchi- cal that ordinary workers are deprived of their rights to participate and speak out. There is no substantial difference between the salary system in SOEs and the wage-labor system of private enterprises. All of these factors have dampened the motivation of SOE employees and thus had an adverse effect on efficiency. In addition, SOEs have not achieved sufficient revenues for years; the process of zhuada fangxiao reform — keeping large enterprises under state ownership while allowing small enterprises to be privatized -- has eroded the proportion of the labor force working for SOEs. Since reforms have damaged worker morale within SOEs, failed to deliver rewards to external stakeholders, and reduced the SOE labor force, it is natural that SOE reforms get little support from the mass of people.
 
Under socialism, it is necessary to reform and perfect the manage- ment system of the state-owned economy according to the require- ments of public ownership: the revenues of SOEs must be submitted to the state, the salaries of SOE leaders must be adjusted, the trend of pursuing personal gains in SOE reform must be forbidden, and, in particular, economic democracy within SOEs must be established. Only by following these steps can SOEs be turned into units really representing laborers'rights and interests. All these steps also reflect the requirements and advantages of the socialist system. It is worth noting here that in a practical process tangled with the issue of whether or not to give up the basic socialist economic system, the confronta- tions between economic powers are very real. Theoretical studies and propaganda are important; nevertheless, ideological rhetoric  will be useless if the socialist campaign has no real power. With the deepening of the worldwide capitalist crisis and the awakening of the Chinese working class and their rising level of organization, the changes in Chinese socioeconomic structures may light the way to a socialist future.

